A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with
functioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2):
1. Inattention: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at least
6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and that negatively
impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defiance,
hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents
and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in
schoolwork, at work, or during other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses details,
work is inaccurate).
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has difficulty
remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy reading).
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems elsewhere,
even in the absence of any obvious distraction).
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork,
chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but quickly loses focus and
is easily sidetracked).
e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing sequential
tasks; difficulty keeping materials and belongings in order; messy, disorganized
work; has poor time management; fails to meet deadlines).
f. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained
mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older adolescents and adults,
preparing reports, completing forms, reviewing lengthy papers).
g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials, pencils,
books, tools, wallets, keys, papenwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones).
h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older adolescents and
adults, may include unrelated thoughts).
i. Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores, running errands; for older
adolescents and adults, returning calls, paying bills, keeping appointments).
2. Hyperactivity and impuisivity: Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted
for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level
and that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities:
Note: The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defiance,
hostility, or a failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents
and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat.
b. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected (e.g., leaves
his or her place in the classroom, in the office or other workplace, or in other
situations that require remaining in place).
c. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is inappropriate. (Note: In adolescents
or adults, may be limited to feeling restless.)
d. Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly.
e. Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor” (e.g., is unable to be or uncomfortable
being still for extended time, as in restaurants, meetings; may be
experienced by others as being restless or difficult to keep up with).
f. Often talks excessively.
g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g., completes
people’s sentences; cannot wait for turn in conversation).
h. Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting in line).
i. Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations, games, or
activities; may start using other people’s things without asking or receiving permission;
for adolescents and adults, may intrude into or take over what others
are doing).
B. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age
12 years.
C. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms are present in two or more settings
(e.g., at home, school, or work; with friends or relatives; in other activities).
D. There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of, social,
academic, or occupational functioning.
E. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or another
psychotic disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., mood
disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, personality disorder, substance intoxication
or withdrawal).
Specify whether:
314.01 (F90.2) Combined presentation: If both Criterion A1 (inattention) and Criterion
A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) are met for the past 6 months.
314.00 (F90.0) Predominantly inattentive presentation: If Criterion A1 (inattention)
is met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months.
314.01 (F90.1) Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation: If Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-
impulsivity) is met and Criterion A1 (inattention) is not met for the past 6 months.
Specify if:
in partial remission: When full criteria were previously met, fewer than the full criteria
have been met for the past 6 months, and the symptoms still result in impairment in
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
Specify current severity:
lUlild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are
present, and symptoms result in no more than minor impairments in social or occupational
functioning.
Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and “severe” are present.
Severe: Many symptoms in excess of tliose required to mal<e tlie diagnosis, or several
symptoms that are particularly severe, are present, or the symptoms result in marked
impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a persistent
pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or
development. Inattention manifests behaviorally in ADHD as wandering off task, lacking
persistence, having difficulty sustaining focus, and being disorganized and is not due to
defiance or lack of comprehension. Hyperactivity refers to excessive motor activity (such as
a child running about) when it is not appropriate, or excessive fidgeting, tapping, or talkativeness.
In adults, hyperactivity may manifest as extreme restlessness or wearing others
out with their activity. Impulsivity refers to hasty actions that occur in the moment without
forethought and that have high potential for harm to the individual (e.g., darting into the
street without looking). Impulsivity may reflect a desire for immediate rewards or an inability
to delay gratification. Impulsive behaviors may manifest as social intrusiveness
(e.g., interrupting others excessively) and/or as making important decisions without consideration
of long-term consequences (e.g., taking a job without adequate information).
ADHD begins in childhood. The requirement that several symptoms be present before
age 12 years conveys the importance of a substantial clinical presentation during childhood.
At the same time, an earlier age at onset is not specified because of difficulties in establishing
precise childhood onset retrospectively. Adult recall of childhood symptoms
tends to be unreliable, and it is beneficial to obtain ancillary information.
Manifestations of the disorder must be present in more than one setting (e.g., home and
school, work). Confirmation of substantial symptoms across settings typically cannot be
done accurately without consulting informants who have seen the individual in those settings.
Typically, symptoms vary depending on context within a given setting. Signs of the
disorder may be minimal or absent when the individual is receiving frequent rewards for
appropriate behavior, is under close supervision, is in a novel setting, is engaged in especially
interesting activities, has consistent external stimulation (e.g., via electronic screens),
or is interacting in one-on-one situations (e.g., the clinician's office).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Mild delays in language, motor, or social development are not specific to ADHD but often cooccur.
Associated features may include low frustration tolerance, irritability, or mood lability.
Even in the absence of a specific learning disorder, academic or work performance is often impaired.
Inattentive behavior is associated with various underlying cognitive processes, and individuals
with ADHD may exhibit cognitive problems on tests of attention, executive
function, or memory, although these tests are not sufficiently sensitive or specific to serve as diagnostic
indices. By early adulthood, ADHD is associated with an increased risk of suicide attempt,
primarily when comorbid with mood, conduct, or substance use disorders.
No biological marker is diagnostic for ADHD. As a group, compared with peers, children
with ADHD display increased slow wave electroencephalograms, reduced total
brain volume on magnetic resonance imaging, and possibly a delay in posterior to anterior
cortical maturation, but these findings are not diagnostic. In the uncommon cases where
there is a known genetic cause (e.g.. Fragile X syndrome, 22qll deletion syndrome), the
ADHD presentation should still be diagnosed