A. Preoccupation with one or more perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance that
are not observable or appear slight to others.
B. At some point during the course of the disorder, the individual has performed repetitive
behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking, reassurance seeking)
or mental acts (e.g., comparing his or her appearance with that of others) in response
to the appearance concerns.
C. The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning.
D. The appearance preoccupation is not better explained by concerns with body fat or
weight in an individual whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder.
Specify if:
With muscle dysmorphia: The individual is preoccupied with the idea that his or her
body build is too small or insufficiently muscular. This specifier is used even if the individual
is preoccupied with other body areas, which is often the case.
Specify if:
Indicate degree of insight regarding body dysmorphic disorder beliefs (e.g., “I look ugly” or
“I lool< deformed”).
With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that the body dysmorphic disorder
beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they may or may not be true.
With poor insight: The individual thinks that the body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are
probably true.
With absent insight/delusionai beliefs: The individual is completely convinced that
the body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true.
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder (formerly known as dysmorphophobia) are preoccupied
with one or more perceived defects or flaws in their physical appearance, which
they believe look ugly, unattractive, abnormal, or deformed (Criterion A). The perceived
flaws are not observable or appear only slight to other individuals. Concerns range from
looking "unattractive" or "not right" to looking "hideous" or "like a monster." Preoccupations
can focus on one or many body areas, most commonly the skin (e.g., perceived
acne, scars, lines, wrinkles, paleness), hair (e.g., "thinning" hair or "excessive" body or facial
hair), or nose (e.g., size or shape). However, any body area can be the focus of concern
(e.g., eyes, teeth, weight, stomach, breasts, legs, face size or shape, lips, chin, eyebrows,
genitals). Some individuals are concerned about perceived asymmetry of body areas. The
preoccupations are intrusive, unwanted, time-consuming (occurring, on average, 3-8
hours per day), and usually difficult to resist or control.
Excessive repetitive behaviors or mental acts (e.g., comparing) are performed in response
to the preoccupation (Criterion B). The individual feels driven to perform these behaviors,
which are not pleasurable and may increase anxiety and dysphoria. They are
typically time-consuming and difficult to resist or control. Common behaviors are comparing
one's appearance with that of other individuals; repeatedly checking perceived
defects in mirrors or other reflecting surfaces or examining them directly; excessively
grooming (e.g., combing, styling, shaving, plucking, or pulling hair); camouflaging (e.g.,
repeatedly applying makeup or covering disliked areas with such things as a hat, clothing,
makeup, or hair); seeking reassurance about how the perceived flaws look; touching disliked
areas to check them; excessively exercising or weight lifting; and seeking cosmetic
procedures. Some individuals excessively tan (e.g., to darken "pale" skin or diminish perceived
acne), repeatedly change their clothes (e.g., to camouflage perceived defects), or
compulsively shop (e.g., for beauty products). Compulsive skin picking intended to
improve perceived skin defects is common and can cause skin damage, infections, or
ruptured blood vessels. The preoccupation must cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C);
usually both are present. Body dysmoφhic disorder must be differentiated from an eating
disorder.
Muscle dysmorphia, a form of body dysmoφhic disorder occurring almost exclusively
in males, consists of preoccupation with the idea that one's body is too small or insufficiently
lean or muscular. Individuals with this form of the disorder actually have a normal-
looking body or are even very muscular. They may also be preoccupied with other
body areas, such as skin or hair. A majority (but not all) diet, exercise, and/or lift weights
excessively, sometimes causing bodily damage. Some use potentially dangerous anabolicandrogenic
steroids and other substances to try to make their body bigger and more muscular.
Body dysmorphic disorder by proxy is a form of body dysmorphic disorder in
which individuals are preoccupied with defects they perceive in another person's appearance.
Insight regarding body dysmorphic disorder beliefs can range from good to absent/
delusional (i.e., delusional beliefs consisting of complete conviction that the individual's
view of their appearance is accurate and undistorted). On average, insight is poor; onethird
or more of individuals currently have delusional body dysmorphic disorder beliefs.
Individuals with delusional body dysmorphic disorder tend to have greater morbidity in
some areas (e.g., suicidality), but this appears accounted for by their tendency to have
more severe body dysmorphic disorder symptoms.