A pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seeking, beginning by early adulthood
and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Is uncomfortable in situations in which he or she is not the center of attention.
2. Interaction with others is often characterized by inappropriate sexually seductive or
provocative behavior.
3. Displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of emotions.
4. Consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self.
5. Has a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in detail.
6. Shows self-dramatization, theatricality, and exaggerated expression of emotion.
7. Is suggestible (i.e., easily influenced by others or circumstances).
8. Considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of histrionic personality disorder is pervasive and excessive emotionality
and attention-seeking behavior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present
in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with histrionic personality disorder are uncomfortable or feel unappreciated
when they are not the center of attention (Criterion 1). Often lively and dramatic, they
tend to draw attention to themselves and may initially charm new acquaintances by their
enthusiasm, apparent openness, or flirtatiousness. These qualities wear thin, however, as
these individuals continually demand to be the center of attention. They commandeer the
role of "the life of the party." If they are not the center of attention, they may do something
dramatic (e.g., make up stories, create a scene) to draw the focus of attention to themselves.
This need is often apparent in their behavior with a clinician (e.g., being flattering, bringing
gifts, providing dramatic descriptions of physical and psychological symptoms that
are replaced by new symptoms each visit).
The appearance and behavior of individuals with this disorder are often inappropriately
sexually provocative or seductive (Criterion 2). This behavior not only is directed toward
persons in whom the individual has a sexual or romantic interest but also occurs in
a wide variety of social, occupational, and professional relationships beyond what is appropriate
for the social context. Emotional expression may be shallow and rapidly shifting
(Criterion 3). Individuals with this disorder consistently use physical appearance to draw
attention to themselves (Criterion 4). They are overly concerned with impressing others by
their appearance and expend an excessive amount of time, energy, and money on clothes
and grooming. They may "fish for compliments" regarding appearance and may be easily
and excessively upset by a critical conunent about how they look or by a photograph that
they regard as unflattering.
These individuals have a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking
in detail (Criterion 5). Strong opinions are expressed with dramatic flair, but underlying
reasons are usually vague and diffuse, without supporting facts and details. For example,
an individual with histrionic personality disorder may comment that a certain individual
is a wonderful human being, yet be unable to provide any specific examples of good qualities
to support this opinion. Individuals with this disorder are characterized by selfdramatization,
theatricality, and an exaggerated expression of emotion (Criterion 6). They
may embarrass friends and acquaintances by an excessive public display of emotions (e.g.,
embracing casual acquaintances with excessive ardor, sobbing uncontrollably on minor
sentimental occasions, having temper tantrums). However, their emotions often seem to
be turned on and off too quickly to be deeply felt, which may lead others to accuse the individual
of faking these feelings.
Individuals with histrionic personality disorder have a high degree of suggestibility (Criterion
7). Their opinions and feelings are easily influenced by others and by current fads.
They may be overly trusting, especially of strong authority figures whom they see as magically
solving their problems. They have a tendency to play hunches and to adopt convictions
quickly. Individuals with this disorder often consider relationships more intimate
than they actually are, describing almost every acquaintance as "my dear, dear friend" or
referring to physicians met only once or twice under professional circumstances by their
first names (Criterion 8).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with histrionic personality disorder may have difficulty achieving emotional intimacy
in romantic or sexual relationships. Without being aware of it, they often act out a
role (e.g., "victim" or "princess") in their relationships to others. They may seek to control
their partner through emotional manipulation or seductiveness on one level, while displaying
a marked dependency on them at another level. Individuals with this disorder often
have impaired relationships with same-sex friends because their sexually provocative interpersonal
style may seem a threat to their friends' relationships. These individuals may also
alienate friends with demands for constant attention. They often become depressed and upset
when they are not the center of attention. They may crave novelty, stimulation, and excitement
and have a tendency to become bored with their usual routine. These individuals
are often intolerant of, or frustrated by, situations that involve delayed gratification, and
their actions are often directed at obtaining immediate satisfaction. Although they often initiate
a job or project with great enthusiasm, their interest may lag quickly. Longer-term relationships
may be neglected to make way for the excitement of new relationships.
The actual risk of suicide is not known, but clinical experience suggests that individuals
with this disorder are at increased risk for suicidal gestures and threats to get attention
and coerce better caregiving. Histrionic personality disorder has been associated with
higher rates of somatic symptom disorder, conversion disorder (functional neurological
symptom disorder), and major depressive disorder. Borderline, narcissistic, antisocial, and
dependent personality disorders often co-occur.