A. A predominant complaint of dissatisfaction witli sleep quantity or quality, associated
with one (or more) of the following symptoms:
1. Difficulty initiating sleep. (In children, this may manifest as difficulty initiating sleep
without caregiver intervention.)
2. Difficulty maintaining sleep, characterized by frequent awakenings or problems returning
to sleep after awakenings. (In children, this may manifest as difficulty returning
to sleep without caregiver intervention.)
3. Early-morning awakening with inability to return to sleep.
B. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
educational, academic, behavioral, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The sleep difficulty occurs at least 3 nights per week.
D. The sleep difficulty is present for at least 3 months.
E. The sleep difficulty occurs despite adequate opportunity for sleep.
F. The insomnia is not better explained by and does not occur exclusively during the
course of another sleep-wake disorder (e.g., narcolepsy, a breathing-related sleep disorder,
a circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, a parasomnia).
G. The insomnia is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication).
H. Coexisting mental disorders and medical conditions do not adequately explain the predominant
complaint of insomnia.
Specify if:
With non-sleep disorder mental comorbidity, including substance use disorders
With other medical comorbidity
With other sleep disorder
Coding note: The code 780.52 (G47.00) applies to all three specifiers. Code also the
relevant associated mental disorder, medical condition, or other sleep disorder immediately
after the code for insomnia disorder in order to indicate the association.
Specify if:
Episodic: Sy(nptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 months.
Persistent: Symptoms last 3 months or longer.
Recurrent: Two (or more) episodes within the space of 1 year.
Note: Acute and short-term insomnia (i.e., symptoms lasting less than 3 months but othenA/
ise meeting all criteria with regard to frequency, intensity, distress, and/or impairment)
should be coded as an other specified insomnia disorder.
Note. The diagnosis of insomnia disorder is given whether it occurs as an independent
condition or is comorbid with another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder),
medical condition (e.g., pain), or another sleep disorder (e.g., a breathing-related sleep disorder).
For instance, insomnia may develop its own course with some anxiety and depressive
features but in the absence of criteria being met for any one mental disorder. Insomnia
may also manifest as a clinical feature of a more predominant mental disorder. Persistent
insomnia may even be a risk factor for depression and is a common residual symptom after
treatment for this condition. With comorbid insomnia and a mental disorder, treatment
may also need to target both conditions. Given these different courses, it is often impossible
to establish the precise nature of the relationship between these clinical entities, and
this relationship may change over time. Therefore, in the presence of insomnia and a comorbid
disorder, it is not necessary to make a causal attribution between the two conditions.
Rather, the diagnosis of insomnia disorder is made with concurrent specification of
the clinically comorbid conditions. A concurrent insomnia diagnosis should only be considered
when the insomnia is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention;
otherwise, no separate diagnosis is necessary.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of insomnia disorder is dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality
with complaints of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep. The sleep complaints are accompanied
by clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning. The sleep disturbance may occur during the course of another
mental disorder or medical condition, or it may occur independently.
Different manifestations of insomnia can occur at different times of the sleep period. Sleeponset
insomnia (or initial insomnia) involves difficulty initiating sleep at bedtime. Sleep maintenance
insomnia (or middle insomnia) involves frequent or prolonged awakenings throughout
the night. Late insomnia involves early-morning awakening with an inability to return to sleep.
Difficulty maintaining sleep is the most common single symptom of insomnia, followed by
difficulty falling asleep, while a combination of these symptoms is the most common presentation
overall. The specific type of sleep complaint often varies over time. Individuals who
complain of difficulty falling asleep at one time may later complain of difficulty maintaining
sleep, and vice versa. Symptoms of difficulty falling asleep and difficulty maintaining sleep
can be quantified by the individual's retrospective self-report, sleep diaries, or other methods,
such as actigraphy or polysomnography, but the diagnosis of insomnia disorder is based on
the individual's subjective perception of sleep or a caretaker's report.
Nonrestorative sleep, a complaint of poor sleep quality that does not leave the individual
rested upon awakening despite adequate duration, is a common sleep complaint usually
occurring in association with difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or less frequently in
isolation. This complaint can also be reported in association with other sleep disorders
(e.g., breathing-related sleep disorder). When a complaint of nonrestorative sleep occurs
in isolation (i.e., in the absence of difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep) but all diagnostic
criteria with regard to frequency, duration, and daytime distress and impairments
are otherwise met, a diagnosis of other specified insomnia disorder or unspecified insomnia
disorder is made.
Aside from the frequency and duration criteria required to make the diagnosis, additional
criteria are useful to quantify insomnia severity. These quantitative criteria, while
arbitrary, are provided for illustrative purpose only. For instance, difficulty initiating sleep
is defined by a subjective sleep latency greater than 20-30 minutes, and difficulty maintaining
sleep is defined by a subjective time awake after sleep onset greater than 20-30 minutes.
Although there is no standard definition of early-morning awakening, this symptom
involves awakening at least 30 minutes before the scheduled time and before total sleep
time reaches hours. It is essential to take into account not only the final awakening time
but also the bedtime on the previous evening. Awakening at 4:00 A.M. does not have the
same clinical significance in those who go to bed at 9:00 P.M. as in those who go to bed at
11:00 P.M. Such a symptom may also reflect an age-dependent decrease in the ability to sustain
sleep or an age-dependent shift in the timing of the main sleep period.
Insomnia disorder involves daytime impairments as well as nighttime sleep difficulties.
These include fatigue or, less commonly, daytime sleepiness; the latter is more common
among older individuals and when insomnia is comorbid with another medical condition
(e.g., chronic pain) or sleep disorder (e.g., sleep apnea). Impairment in cognitive performance
may include difficulties with attention, concentration and memory, and even with performing
simple manual skills. Associated mood disturbances are typically described as irritability or
mood lability and less commonly as depressive or anxiety symptoms. Not all individuals with
nighttime sleep disturbances are distressed or have functional impairment. For example, sleep
continuity is often interrupted in healthy older adults who nevertheless identify themselves
as good sleepers. A diagnosis of insomnia disorder should be reserved for those individuals
with significant daytime distress or impairment related to their nighttime sleep difficulties.