A. Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both:
Obsessions are defined by (1) and (2):
1. Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at some
time during the disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted, and that in most individuals
cause marked anxiety or distress.
2. The individual attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, urges, or images, or to
neutralize them with some other thought or action (i.e., by performing a compulsion).
Compulsions are defined by (1) and (2):
1. Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts (e.g.,
praying, counting, repeating words silently) that the individual feels driven to perform
in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly.
2. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or distress,
or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviors or
mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neutralize
or prevent, or are clearly excessive.
Note: Young children may not be able to articulate the aims of these behaviors or
mental acts.
B. The obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g., take more than 1 hour per
day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning.
C. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder
(e.g., excessive worries, as in generalized anxiety disorder; preoccupation with appearance,
as in body dysmorphic disorder; difficulty discarding or parting with possessions,
as in hoarding disorder; hair pulling, as in trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder];
skin picking, as in excoriation [skin-picking] disorder; stereotypies, as in stereotypic
movement disorder; ritualized eating behavior, as in eating disorders; preoccupation
with substances or gambling, as in substance-related and addictive disorders; preoccupation
with having an illness, as in illness anxiety disorder; sexual urges or fantasies,
as in paraphilic disorders; impulses, as in disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders;
guilty ruminations, as in major depressive disorder; thought insertion or delusional
preoccupations, as in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders; or
repetitive patterns of behavior, as in autism spectrum disorder).
Specify if:
With good or fair insiglit: The individual recognizes that obsessive-compulsive disorder
beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they may or may not be true.
With poor insight: The individual thinks obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are
probably true.
With absent insight/deiusionai beiiefs: The individual is completely convinced that
obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true.
Specify if:
Tic-reiated: The individual has a current or past history of a tic disorder.
Specifiers
Many individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have dysfunctional beliefs.
These beliefs can include an inflated sense of responsibility and the tendency to overestimate
threat; perfectionism and intolerance of uncertainty; and over-importance of thoughts
(e.g., believing that having a forbidden thought is as bad as acting on it) and the need to
control thoughts.
Individuals with OCD vary in the degree of insight they have about the accuracy of the
beliefs that underlie their obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Many individuals have good or
fair insight (e.g., the individual believes that the house definitely will not, probably will not,
or may or may not bum down if the stove is not checked 30 times). Some have poor insight
(e.g., the individual believes that the house will probably burn down if the stove is not
checked 30 times), and a few (4% or less) have absent insight/delusional beliefs (e.g., the individual
is convinced that the house will bum down if the stove is not checked 30 times).
Insight can vary within an individual over the course of the illness. Poorer insight has been
linked to worse long-term outcome.
Up to 30% of individuals with OCD have a lifetime tic disorder. This is most common
in males with onset of OCD in childhood. These individuals tend to differ from those without
a history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD symptoms, comorbidity, course,
and pattem of familial transmission.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of OCD are the presence of obsessions and compulsions (Criterion
A). Obsessions are repetitive and persistent thoughts (e.g., of contamination), images
(e.g., of violent or horrific scenes), or urges (e.g., to stab someone). Importantly, obsessions
are not pleasurable or experienced as voluntary: they are intrusive and unwanted and
cause marked distress or anxiety in most individuals. The individual attempts to ignore or
suppress these obsessions (e.g., avoiding triggers or using thought suppression) or to neutralize
them with another thought or action (e.g., performing a compulsion). Compulsions
(or rituals) are repetitive behaviors (e.g., washing, checking) or mental acts (e.g., counting,
repeating words silently) that the individual feels driven to perform in response to an
obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly. Most individuals with OCD
have both obsessions and compulsions. Compulsions are typically performed in response
to an obsession (e.g., thoughts of contamination leading to washing rituals or that something
is incorrect leading to repeating rituals until it feels "just right")· The aim is to reduce
the distress triggered by obsessions or to prevent a feared event (e.g., becoming ill). However,
these compulsions either are not connected in a realistic way to the feared event (e.g.,
arranging items symmetrically to prevent harm to a loved one) or are clearly excessive
(e.g., showering for hours each day). Compulsions are not done for pleasure, although some
individuals experience relief from anxiety or distress.
Criterion B emphasizes that obsessions and compulsions must be time-consuming (e.g.,
more than 1 hour per day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment to warrant
a diagnosis of OCD. This criterion helps to distinguish the disorder from the occasional intmsive
thoughts or repetitive behaviors that are common in the general population (e.g.,
double-checking that a door is locked). The frequency and severity of obsessions and compulsions
vary across individuals with OCD (e.g., some have mild to moderate symptoms,
spending 1-3 hours per day obsessing or doing compulsions, whereas others have nearly
constant intmsive thoughts or compulsions that can be incapacitating).