A pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and inteφersonal
control, at the expense of flexibility, openness, and efficiency, beginning by
early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the
following:
1. Is preoccupied with details, rules, lists, order, organization, or schedules to the extent
that the major point of the activity is lost.
2. Shows perfectionism that interferes with task completion (e.g., is unable to complete a
project because his or her own overly strict standards are not met).
3. Is excessively devoted to work and productivity to the exclusion of leisure activities and
friendships (not accounted for by obvious economic necessity).
4. Is overconscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or
values (not accounted for by cultural or religious identification).
5. Is unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects even when they have no sentimental
value.
6. Is reluctant to delegate tasks or to work with others unless they submit to exactly his
or her way of doing things.
7. Adopts a miserly spending style toward both self and others; money is viewed as
something to be hoarded for future catastrophes.
8. Shows rigidity and stubbornness.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is a preoccupation
with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of
flexibility, openness, and efficiency. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present
in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder attempt to maintain a
sense of control through painstaking attention to rules, trivial details, procedures, lists,
schedules, or form to the extent that the major point of the activity is lost (Criterion 1). They
are excessively careful and prone to repetition, paying extraordinary attention to detail
and repeatedly checking for possible mistakes. They are oblivious to the fact that other
people tend to become very annoyed at the delays and inconveniences that result from this
behavior. For example, when such individuals misplace a list of things to be done, they
will spend an inordinate amount of time looking for the list rather than spending a few
moments re-creating it from memory and proceeding to accomplish the tasks. Time is
poorly allocated, and the most important tasks are left to the last moment. The perfectionism
and self-imposed high standards of performance cause significant dysfunction and
distress in these individuals. They may become so involved in making every detail of a
project absolutely perfect that the project is never finished (Criterion 2). For example, the
completion of a written report is delayed by numerous time-consuming rewrites that all
come up short of "perfection." Deadlines are missed, and aspects of the individual's life
that are not the current focus of activity may fall into disarray.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder display excessive devotion
to work and productivity to the exclusion of leisure activities and friendships (Criterion 3).
This behavior is not accounted for by economic necessity. They often feel that they do not
have time to take an evening or a weekend day off to go on an outing or to just relax. They
may keep postponing a pleasurable activity, such as a vacation, so that it may never occur.
When they do take time for leisure activities or vacations, they are very uncomfortable unless
they have taken along something to work on so they do not "waste time." There may be
a great concentration on household chores (e.g., repeated excessive cleaning so that "one
could eat off the floor"). If they spend time with friends, it is likely to be in some kind of formally
organized activity (e.g., sports). Hobbies or recreational activities are approached as
serious tasks requiring careful organization and hard work to master. The emphasis is on
perfect performance. These individuals turn play into a structured task (e.g., correcting an
infant for not putting rings on the post in the right order; telling a toddler to ride his or her tricycle
in a straight line; turning a baseball game into a harsh "lesson").
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder may be excessively conscientious,
scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or values (Criterion
4). They may force themselves and others to follow rigid moral principles and very
strict standards of performance. They may also be mercilessly self-critical about their own
mistakes. Individuals with this disorder are rigidly deferential to authority and rules and
insist on quite literal compliance, with no rule bending for extenuating circumstances. For
example, the individual will not lend a quarter to a friend who needs one to make a telephone
call because "neither a borrower nor a lender be" or because it would be "bad" for
the person's character. These qualities should not be accounted for by the individual's cultural
or religious identification.
Individuals with this disorder may be unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects,
even when they have no sentimental value (Criterion 5). Often these individuals will admit
to being "pack rats." They regard discarding objects as wasteful because "you never
know when you might need something" and will become upset if someone tries to get rid of
the things they have saved. Their spouses or roommates may complain about the amount of
space taken up by old parts, magazines, broken appliances, and so on.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are reluctant to delegate
tasks or to work with others (Criterion 6). They stubbornly and unreasonably insist that
everything be done their way and that people conform to their way of doing things. They
often give very detailed instructions about how things should be done (e.g., there is one
and only one way to mow the lawn, wash the dishes, build a doghouse) and are surprised
and irritated if others suggest creative alternatives. At other times they may reject offers of
help even when behind schedule because they believe no one else can do it right.
Individuals with this disorder may be miserly and stingy and maintain a standard of
living far below what they can afford, believing that spending must be tightly controlled to
provide for future catastrophes (Criterion 7). Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
is characterized by rigidity and stubbornness (Criterion 8). Individuals with this disorder
are so concerned about having things done the one "correct" way that they have trouble
going along with anyone else's ideas. These individuals plan ahead in meticulous detail
and are unwilling to consider changes. Totally wrapped up in their own perspective, they
have difficulty acknowledging the viewpoints of others. Friends and colleagues may become
frustrated by this constant rigidity. Even when individuals with obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder recognize that it may be in their interest to compromise, they
may stubbornly refuse to do so, arguing that it is "the principle of the thing."