A. Recurrent unexpected panic attacks. A panic attack is an abrupt surge of intense fear
or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes, and during which time four
(or more) of the following symptoms occur;
Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.
1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2. Sweating.
3. Trembling or shaking.
4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.
5. Feelings of choking.
6. Chest pain or discomfort.
7. Nausea or abdominal distress.
8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint.
9. Chills or heat sensations.
10. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).
11. Derealization (feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (being detached from oneself).
12. Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”
13. Fear of dying.
Note: Culture-specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness, headache, uncontrollable
screaming or crying) may be seen. Such symptoms should not count as one of
the four required symptoms.
B. At least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month (or more) of one or both of
the following:
1. Persistent concern or worry about additional panic attacks or their consequences
(e.g., losing control, having a heart attack, “going crazy”).
2. A significant maladaptive change in behavior related to the attacks (e.g., behaviors
designed to avoid having panic attacks, such as avoidance of exercise or unfamiliar
situations).
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism, cardiopulmonary
disorders).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., the panic attacks
do not occur only in response to feared social situations, as in social anxiety disorder:
in response to circumscribed phobic objects or situations, as in specific phobia:
in response to obsessions, as in obsessive-compulsive disorder: in response to reminders
of traumatic events, as in posttraumatic stress disorder: or in response to separation
from attachment figures, as in separation anxiety disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Panic disorder refers to recurrent unexpected panic attacks (Criterion A). A panic attack is
an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes,
and during which time four or more of a list of 13 physical and cognitive symptoms occur.
The term recurrent literally means more than one unexpected panic attack. The term unexpected
refers to a panic attack for which there is no obvious cue or trigger at the time of occurrence—
that is, the attack appears to occur from out of the blue, such as when the
individual is relaxing or emerging from sleep (nocturnal panic attack). In contrast, expected
panic attacks are attacks for which there is an obvious cue or trigger, such as a situation in
which panic attacks typically occur. The determination of whether panic attacks are expected
or unexpected is made by the clinician, who makes this judgment based on a combination
of careful questioning as to the sequence of events preceding or leading up to the
attack and the individual's own judgment of whether or not the attack seemed to occur for
no apparent reason. Cultural interpretations may influence the assignment of panic attacks
as expected or unexpected (see section "Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues" for this
disorder). In the United States and Europe, approximately one-half of individuals with
panic disorder have expected panic attacks as well as unexpected panic attacks. Thus, the
presence of expected panic attacks does not rule out the diagnosis of panic disorder. For
more details regarding expected versus unexpected panic attacks, see the text accompanying
panic attacks (pp. 214-217).
The frequency and severity of panic attacks vary widely. In terms of frequency, there
may be moderately frequent attacks (e.g., one per week) for months at a time, or short
bursts of more frequent attacks (e.g., daily) separated by weeks or months without any attacks
or with less frequent attacks (e.g., two per month) over many years. Persons who
have infrequent panic attacks resemble persons with more frequent panic attacks in terms
of panic attack symptoms, demographic characteristics, comorbidity with other disorders,
family history, and biological data. In terms of severity, individuals with panic disorder
may have both full-symptom (four or more symptoms) and limited-symptom (fewer than
four symptoms) attacks, and the number and type of panic attack symptoms frequently
differ from one panic attack to the next. However, more than one unexpected full-symptom
panic attack is required for the diagnosis of panic disorder.
The worries about panic attacks or their consequences usually pertain to physical concerns,
such as worry that panic attacks reflect the presence of life-threatening illnesses
(e.g., cardiac disease, seizure disorder); social concerns, such as embarrassment or fear of
being judged negatively by others because of visible panic symptoms; and concerns about
mental functioning, such as ''going crazy" or losing control (Criterion B). The maladaptive
changes in behavior represent attempts to minimize or avoid panic attacks or their consequences.
Examples include avoiding physical exertion, reorganizing daily life to ensure
that help is available in the event of a panic attack, restricting usual daily activities, and
avoiding agoraphobia-type situations, such as leaving home, using public transportation,
or shopping. If agoraphobia is present, a separate diagnosis of agoraphobia is given