A. A pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others such that their nfiotives are interpreted
as malevolent, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts,
as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
1. Suspects, without sufficient basis, that others are exploiting, harming, or deceiving
him or her.
2. Is preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trustworthiness of friends
or associates.
3. Is reluctant to confide in others because of unwarranted fear that the information
will be used maliciously against him or her.
4. Reads hidden demeaning or threatening meanings into benign remarks or events.
5. Persistently bears grudges (i.e., is unforgiving of insults, injuries, or slights).
6. Perceives attacks on his or her character or reputation that are not apparent to others
and is quick to react angrily or to counterattack.
7. Has recurrent suspicions, without justification, regarding fidelity of spouse or sexual
partner.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or
depressive disorder with psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder and is not
attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e., “paranoid
personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of paranoid personality disorder is a pattern of pervasive distrust
and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are interpreted as malevolent. This
pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with this disorder assume that other people will exploit, harm, or deceive
them, even if no evidence exists to support this expectation (Criterion Al). They suspect on
the basis of little or no evidence that others are plotting against them and may attack them
suddenly, at any time and without reason. They often feel that they have been deeply and
irreversibly injured by another person or persons even when there is no objective evidence
for this. They are preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trustworthiness
of their friends and associates, whose actions are minutely scrutinized for evidence of hostile
intentions (Criterion A2). Any perceived deviation from trustworthiness or loyalty
serves to support their underlying assumptions. They are so amazed when a friend or associate
shows loyalty that they cannot trust or believe it. If they get into trouble, they expect
that friends and associates will either attack or ignore them.
Individuals with paranoid personality disorder are reluctant to confide in or become
close to others because they fear that the information they share will be used against them
(Criterion A3). They may refuse to answer personal questions, saying that the information
is "nobody's business." They read hidden meanings that are demeaning and threatening
into benign remarks or events (Criterion A4). For example, an individual with this disorder
may misinterpret an honest mistake by a store clerk as a deliberate attempt to shortchange,
or view a casual humorous remark by a co-worker as a serious character attack.
Compliments are often misinterpreted (e.g., a compliment on a new acquisition is misinterpreted
as a criticism for selfishness; a compliment on an accomplishment is misinterpreted
as an attempt to coerce more and better performance). They may view an offer of
help as a criticism that they are not doing well enough on their own.
Individuals with this disorder persistently bear grudges and are unwilling to forgive
the insults, injuries, or slights that they think they have received (Criterion A5). Minor
slights arouse major hostility, and the hostile feelings persist for a long time. Because they
are constantly vigilant to the harmful intentions of others, they very often feel that their
character or reputation has been attacked or that they have been slighted in some other
way. They are quick to counterattack and react with anger to perceived insults (Criterion
A6). Individuals with this disorder may be pathologically jealous, often suspecting that
their spouse or sexual partner is unfaithful without any adequate justification (Criterion
A7). They may gather trivial and circumstantial "evidence" to support their jealous beliefs.
They want to maintain complete control of intimate relationships to avoid being betrayed
and may constantly question and challenge the whereabouts, actions, intentions, and fidelity
of their spouse or partner.
Paranoid personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior occurs
exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive disorder
with psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder, or if it is attributable to the
physiological effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or another medical
condition (Criterion B).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with paranoid personality disorder are generally difficult to get along with
and often have problems with close relationships. Their excessive suspiciousness and hostility
may be expressed in overt argumentativeness, in recurrent complaining, or by quiet,
apparently hostile aloofness. Because they are hypervigilant for potential threats, they
may act in a guarded, secretive, or devious manner and appear to be "cold" and lacking in
tender feelings. Although they may appear to be objective, rational, and unemotional, they
more often display a labile range of affect, with hostile, stubborn, and sarcastic expressions
predominating. Their combative and suspicious nature may elicit a hostile response in
others, which then serves to confirm their original expectations.
Because individuals with paranoid personality disorder lack trust in others, they have
an excessive need to be self-sufficient and a strong sense of autonomy. They also need to
have a high degree of control over those around them. They are often rigid, critical of others,
and unable to collaborate, although they have great difficulty accepting criticism themselves.
They may blame others for their own shortcomings. Because of their quickness to
counterattack in response to the threats they perceive around them, they may be litigious
and frequently become involved in legal disputes. Individuals with this disorder seek to
confirm their preconceived negative notions regarding people or situations they encounter,
attributing malevolent motivations to others that are projections of their own fears. They
may exhibit thinly hidden, unrealistic grandiose fantasies, are often attuned to issues of
power and rank, and tend to develop negative stereotypes of others, particularly those
from population groups distinct from their own. Attracted by simplistic formulations of the
world, they are often wary of ambiguous situations. They may be perceived as "fanatics"
and form tightly knit "cults" or groups with others who share their paranoid belief systems.
Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very
brief psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours). In some instances, paranoid personality
disorder may appear as the premorbid antecedent of delusional disorder or schizophrenia.
Individuals with paranoid personality disorder may develop major depressive
disorder and may be at increased risk for agoraphobia and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Alcohol and other substance use disorders frequently occur. The most common cooccurring
personality disorders appear to be schizotypal, schizoid, narcissistic, avoidant,
and borderlin