It's irritating and frustrating. You can't avoid the stimuli of so many things that are "wrong" about the world.

It's like a thousand little pinches that, together, make your life very unconfortable.

For instance, when you enter into a room your attention is automatically drawn to a lot of misaligned objects. Your focus is always shared with things that don't really matter but are, for you, "important".

The side effect is we always want the cleanest environments, the cleanest designs, the simpler the better. But people also like that, what is the difference? The difference is: it's almost as it's a matter of survival. It's a reduction of stimuli that turns your life into something bearable.

Talking about people, you're always hard with yourself and others. You demand people do things the way you want, the perfect way.

It's like a mental prison, where the world must be perfect. Me included.

IMPORTANT TO SAY:

OCPD is a less known cousin of OCD. It's harder to diagnose because people don't see perfectionism as a problem and the subject may be just a "difficult" person.

So, look for help if you identify yourself with my answer or if you have at least 4 of these symptoms (from DSM-5):

feelings of excessive doubt and caution;
preoccupation with details, rules, lists, order, organization or schedule;
perfectionism that interferes with task completion;
excessive conscientiousness, scrupulousness, and undue preoccupation with productivity to the exclusion of pleasure and interpersonal relationships;
excessive pedantry and adherence to social conventions;
rigidity and stubbornness;
unreasonable insistence by the individual that others submit exactly to his or her way of doing things, or unreasonable reluctance to allow others to do things;
intrusion of insistent and unwelcome thoughts or impulses.

These tests might also help:

Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder Test
Cammer's Test for OCPD

OCPD is treatable. I can say that because I had 7 and a half of those symptoms. :) Today I have a normal life. Today mind is free. Well, 90% of it.