Note: The following criteria apply to adults, adolescents, and children older than 6 years.
For children 6 years and younger, see corresponding criteria below.
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or
more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member or close
friend. In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the
event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic
event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains: police officers repeatedly
exposed to details of child abuse).
Note: Criterion A4 does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television,
movies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the
traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s).
Note: In children older than 6 years, repetitive play may occur in which themes or
aspects of the traumatic event(s) are expressed.
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are
related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: In children, there may be frightening dreams without recognizable content.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts as if
the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum,
with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present
surroundings.)
Note: In children, trauma-specific reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues
that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble
an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after
the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or both of the following:
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about
or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations,
activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings
about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
D. Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event(s),
beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or
more) of the following:
1. Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s) (typically due to dissociative
amnesia and not to other factors such as head injury, alcohol, or drugs).
2. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others,
or the world (e.g., “I am bad,” “No one can be trusted,” ‘The world is completely
dangerous,” “My whole nervous system is permanently ruined”).
3. Persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences of the traumatic
event(s) that lead the individual to blame himself/herself or others.
4. Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame).
5. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities.
6. Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.
7. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to experience
happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).
E. Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning
or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or
more) of the following:
1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed
as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects.
2. Reckless or self-destructive behavior.
3. Hypervigilance.
4. Exaggerated startle response.
5. Problems with concentration.
6. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).
F. Duration of the disturbance (Criteria B, C, D, and E) is more than 1 month.
G. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning.
H. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
medication, alcohol) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms: The individual’s symptoms meet the criteria for posttraumatic
stress disorder, and in addition, in response to the stressor, the individual experiences
persistent or recurrent symptoms of either of the following:
1. Depersonalization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached from,
and as if one were an outside observer of, one’s mental processes or body (e.g.,
feeling as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality of self or body
or of time moving slowly).
2. Dereaiization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of unreality of surroundings
(e.g., the world around the individual is experienced as unreal, dreamlike, distant,
or distorted).
Note: To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must not be attributable to the
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts, behavior during alcohol intoxication)
or another medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least 6 months
after the event (although the onset and expression of some symptoms may be immediate).
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder for Children 6 Years and Younger
A. In children 6 years and younger, exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury,
or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others, especially primary caregivers.
Note: Witnessing does not include events that are witnessed only in electronic media,
television, movies, or pictures.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a parent or caregiving figure.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the
traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic
event(s).
Note: Spontaneous and intrusive memories may not necessarily appear distressing
and may be expressed as play reenactment.
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are
related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: It may not be possible to ascertain that the frightening content is related to
the traumatic event.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the child feels or acts as if the
traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum, with
the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present surroundings.)
Such trauma-specific reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues
that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).