A. A pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships and a restricted range of
expression of emotions in interpersonal settings, beginning by early adulthood and
present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
1. Neither desires nor enjoys close relationships, including being part of a family.
2. Almost always chooses solitary activities.
3. Has little, if any, interest in having sexual experiences with another person.
4. Tal<es pleasure in few, if any, activities.
5. Lacks close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.
6. Appears indifferent to the praise or criticism of others.
7. Shows emotional coldness, detachment, or flattened affectivity.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or
depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism
spectrum disorder and is not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical
condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e., “schizoid
personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of schizoid personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of detachment
from social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal
settings. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with schizoid personality disorder appear to lack a desire for intimacy,
seem indifferent to opportunities to develop close relationships, and do not seem to derive
much satisfaction from being part of a family or other social group (Criterion Al). They
prefer spending time by themselves, rather than being with other people. They often appear
to be socially isolated or "loners" and almost always choose solitary activities or hobbies
that do not include interaction with others (Criterion A2). They prefer mechanical or
abstract tasks, such as computer or mathematical games. They may have very little interest
in having sexual experiences with another person (Criterion A3) and take pleasure in few,
if any, activities (Criterion A4). There is usually a reduced experience of pleasure from sensory,
bodily, or interpersonal experiences, such as walking on a beach at sunset or having
sex. These individuals have no close friends or confidants, except possibly a first-degree
relative (Criterion A5).
Individuals with schizoid personality disorder often seem indifferent to the approval
or criticism of others and do not appear to be bothered by what others may think of them
(Criterion A6). They may be oblivious to the normal subtleties of social interaction and often
do not respond appropriately to social cues so that they seem socially inept or superficial
and self-absorbed. They usually display a "bland" exterior without visible emotional
reactivity and rarely reciprocate gestures or facial expressions, such as smiles or nods (Criterion
A7). They claim that they rarely experience strong emotions such as anger and joy.
They often display a constricted affect and appear cold and aloof. However, in those very
unusual circumstances in which these individuals become at least temporarily comfortable
in revealing themselves, they may acknowledge having painful feelings, particularly
related to social interactions.
Schizoid personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior occurs
exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar or depressive disorder with psychotic
features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder, or if it is attributable
to the physiological effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or another
medical condition (Criterion B).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizoid personality disorder may have particular difficulty expressing
anger, even in response to direct provocation, which contributes to the impression that
they lack emotion. Their lives sometimes seem directionless, and they may appear to
"drift" in their goals. Such individuals often react passively to adverse circumstances and
have difficulty responding appropriately to important life events. Because of their lack of
social skills and lack of desire for sexual experiences, individuals with this disorder have
few friendships, date infrequently, and often do not marry. Occupational functioning may
be impaired, particularly if interpersonal involvement is required, but individuals with
this disorder may do well when they work under conditions of social isolation. Particularly
in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very brief psychotic
episodes (lasting minutes to hours). In some instances, schizoid personality
disorder may appear as the premorbid antecedent of delusional disorder or schizophrenia.
Individuals with this disorder may sometimes develop major depressive disorder.
Schizoid personality disorder most often co-occurs with schizotypal, paranoid, and avoidant
personality disorders.