A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a
1 -month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1 ), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B. For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of functioning
in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, is
markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in childhood
or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal, academic,
or occupational functioning).
C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period
must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Criterion
A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual
symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may
be manifested by only negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed in Criterion
A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features
have been ruled out because either 1 ) no major depressive or manic episodes have
occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have
occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the
total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood
onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions
or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia,
are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder
and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meeting
the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time period
in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a period of time
during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the
defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a
previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be determined
after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a
minimum of one relapse).
■Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods being
very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder,
pp. 119-120, for definition).
Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with
schizophrenia to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor behavior,
and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of schizophrenia can be made without using this severity specifier.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia involve a range of cognitive, behavioral, and
emotional dysfunctions, but no single symptom is pathognomonic of the disorder. The diagnosis
involves the recognition of a constellation of signs and symptoms associated with
impaired occupational or social functioning. Individuals with the disorder will vary substantially
on most features, as schizophrenia is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome.
At least two Criterion A symptoms must be present for a significant portion of time
during a 1-month period or longer. At least one of these symptoms must be the clear presence
of delusions (Criterion Al), hallucinations (Criterion A2), or disorganized speech
(Criterion A3). Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior (Criterion A4) and negative
symptoms (Criterion A5) may also be present. In those situations in which the activephase
symptoms remit within a month in response to treatment. Criterion A is still met if the
clinician estimates that they would have persisted in the absence of treatment.
Schizophrenia involves impairment in one or more major areas of functioning (Criterion
B). If the disturbance begins in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of function
is not attained. Comparing the individual with unaffected siblings may be helpful. The
dysfunction persists for a substantial period during the course of the disorder and does not
appear to be a direct result of any single feature. Avolition (i.e., reduced drive to pursue
goal-directed behavior; Criterion A5) is linked to the social dysfunction described under
Criterion B. There is also strong evidence for a relationship between cognitive impairment
(see the section "Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis" for this disorder) and functional
impairment in individuals with schizophrenia.
Some signs of the disturbance must persist for a continuous period of at least 6 months
(Criterion C). Pi;odromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symptoms
may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or
delusions. Individuals may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs that are not of delusional
proportions (e.g., ideas of reference or magical thinking); they may have unusual
perceptual experiences (e.g., sensing the presence of an unseen person); their speech may
be generally understandable but vague; and their behavior may be unusual but not grossly
disorganized (e.g., mumbling in public). Negative symptoms are common in the prodromal
and residual phases and can be severe. Individuals who had been socially active
may become withdrawn from previous routines. Such behaviors are often the first sign of
a disorder.
Mood symptoms and full mood episodes are common in schizophrenia and may be concurrent
with active-phase symptomatology. However, as distinct from a psychotic mood disorder,
a schizophrenia diagnosis requires the presence of delusions or hallucinations in the
absence of mood episodes. In addition, mood episodes, taken in total, should be present for
only a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizophrenia may display inappropriate affect (e.g., laughing in the absence
of an appropriate stimulus); a dysphoric mood that can take the form of depression,
anxiety, or anger; a disturbed sleep pattern (e.g., daytime sleeping and nighttime activity);
and a lack of interest in eating or food refusal. Depersonalization, derealization, and somatic
concerns may occur and sometimes reach delusional proportions. Anxiety and phobias
are common. Cognitive deficits in schizophrenia are conrmion and are strongly linked
to vocational and functional impairments. These deficits can include decrements in declarative
memory, working memory, language function, and other executive functions, as well
as slower processing speed. Abnormalities in sensory processing and inhibitory capacity,
as well as reductions in attention, are also found. Some individuals with schizophrenia
show social cognition deficits, including deficits in the ability to infer the intentions of
other people (theory of mind), and may attend to and then inteφret irrelevant events or
stimuli as meaningful, perhaps leading to the generation of explanatory delusions. These
impairments frequently persist during symptomatic remission.
Some individuals with psychosis may lack insight or awareness of their disorder (i.e.,
anosognosia). This lack of "'insight" includes unawareness of symptoms of schizophrenia
and may be present throughout the entire course of the illness. Unawareness of illness is
typically a symptom of schizophrenia itself rather than a coping strategy. It is comparable
to the lack of awareness of neurological deficits following brain damage, termed anosognosia.
This symptom is the most common predictor of non-adherence to treatment, and it
predicts higher relapse rates, increased number of involuntary treatments, poorer psychosocial
functioning, aggression, and a poorer course of illness.
Hostility and aggression can be associated with schizophrenia, although spontaneous
or random assault is uncommon. Aggression is more frequent for younger males and for
individuals with a past history of violence, non-adherence with treatment, substance
abuse, and impulsivity. It should be noted that the vast majority of persons with schizophrenia
are not aggressive and are more frequently victimized than are individuals in the
general population.
Currently, there are no radiological, laboratory, or psychometric tests for the disorder.
Differences are evident in multiple brain regions between groups of healthy individuals
and persons with schizophrenia, including evidence from neuroimaging, neuropathological,
and neurophysiological studies. Differences are also evident in cellular architecture,
white matter connectivity, and gray matter volume in a variety of regions such as the prefrontal
and temporal cortices. Reduced overall brain volume has been observed, as well as
increased brain volume reduction with age. Brain volume reductions with age are more
pronounced in individuals with schizophrenia than in healthy individuals. Finally, individuals
with schizophrenia appear to differ from individuals without the disorder in eyetracking
and electrophysiological indices.
Neurological soft signs common in individuals with schizophrenia include impairments
in motor coordination, sensory integration, and motor sequencing of complex movements;
left-right confusion; and disinhibition of associated movements. In addition, minor physical
anomalies of the face and limbs may occur.